Yes, yes, I am.
Hello Kate Linder.
I yeah I think you're on. Let me check that every panelist is here. And, yeah, we're all here. And so I would like us to start that's what we should do.
Okay, so let's do that.
Hi, everyone.
Thank you.
Hi everyone, thanks for coming to this panel and I know it's really early for some of you, so I appreciate you waking up I hope you all have giant mugs of coffee like I do, or your first afternoon coffee.
Margie Lissa Brink and I will be. We organized this panel it's actually our fifth narrative panel, and I'm super happy about that. I think number six I don't know where it will be, but I'm looking forward to that as well.
Margie Would you like to introduce us and everyone.
Yes, yes thank you my chain. I just want to welcome everyone to our narrative panel, which is a literature bound to platform, exploring opportunities for narrative connections and disconnections.
And actually, I would say that.
My name is Marjorie Lusa Brink and some of you know me as MD Kimberly, and like she and I will be co chairing the panel but like she will be doing most of the driving
of the narrative gang and actually this is the sixth narrative panel. It's the fifth that like she and I have organized we had one in we started in 2016 at Vancouver.
At the Vancouver conference, and
since then we have with us veterans that have been at all the panels. And over the years many other new people joining and, and contributing. And then, and then, this year we have our veterans and new people, as well.
And we have been over the years, exploring many of the ideas that come up around specific issues of narrative.
Both fiction and nonfiction, in a literature.
The narrative gang.
Today we'll be looking at how platforms,
either.
Effective effect, or.
In fact, in, you know, enhance our ability to tell narratives. We started out last year actually thinking about connections and disconnections as a way of exploring exactly what happens to narrative in the platform situation, and other words, how do we
enter and exit. And what does that do to narrative in terms of our relationship to our audience.
And among the people that are here today. We have a, an amazing range of people who have used every almost every software and every platform that I can think of, from for the last 30 years.
In fact, I started making a list and I thought well that'll take all of our all of our time so I will just say that you know we have, we have gone from floppy disk to augmented reality.
We've gone from HTML and blogs to telephone opera opera as we've gone from a from the most primitive of story space software, all the way to iPad apps and beyond.
I'm Eric lawyer, Christy Sheffield Sanford will lowers Caitlin Fisher and like she fan will be giving will be sharing their experience with these platforms and the work that they're, they're doing.
And then, because this conference has actually opened up a whole new world of discussion about platform and platform possibility. I hope that we can bring some of that to our discussion today because we will have a good long time to talk about the things
that have come on to the scene.
In the last few days. I also want to give a shout out to Scott and Soren and all of the people that contributed to this incredible conference this has been amazing.
I have loved every minute, and I cannot believe how beautifully it's been organized and how wonderful it's been to have you all here. So with without any further ado, I'm going to turn this back over to lie, cheat, and I will be here as responded to help,
help, ask questions and move things along in the, in the discussion, when we get to that so thank you all for being here.
Thanks for that Margie.
So we have several speakers today and we, I think we were thinking about the panel as more of a lightning talks plus discussion.
So, there isn't a particular order that we'd agreed to do someone want to go first. And they would they just like to get it over with.
Oh, sure. Thank you.
And thanks clo and the panel for the chance to talk about electronic literature, and the effect platforms have on narrative.
Start out with two little short parts and then give you a little slideshow Ode to daring, you just have to get crazier. And that's a quote from Pina Bausch to one of her dancers after 20 years that was the only thing she ever said to her, in general,
presenting my work online has resulted in narratives that are shorter, often interrupted increasingly paired with images and filled with connections.
The web metaphor is still strong and makes deep time multiple associations and aggressions the norm.
My animations on Vimeo or YouTube or not so impacted by those platforms as by the supporting platforms like keynote, Max answer PowerPoint.
And I movie and mp4 Mini keynote effects designed for text can dramatically impact how narratives are conceived and presented in book form or literary sites.
After working with animation I'm increasingly turned to capturing and presenting text in motion and letting images control the text.
I love the visual, the source idea linking words and space layers reveal how space and parts narrative, especially in poetry and lyrical essays.
Many feel emphasizing space and Portree threatens sound and rhythm is primary, but I think spatial and temporal awareness can coexist.
And the little second section is blow it up. This concept is analogous to Burning Down the House destruction is central to distilling essence shedding boring or dead ideas and capturing the case vitality keynote transition effects are powerful words can
fly from the scene at random, an image can be set a flame Redis this flip flop fall down the page. I'm often a voyeur or catching text and image in some intriguing act, creating tension or new associations, I wouldn't have otherwise envisioned.
years ago after Joel Lippmann read his point stamped on an old paper bag page he crumbled it.
This unforgettable performance made me reflect on the sanctity of books, and the transient nature of life. The Japanese have a phrase motto know where a bittersweet sensitivity to impermanence, and now we're going to do a little screen share and close
some, some windows so it won't look too messy.
Okay.
These are excerpts from the manuscript in progress called states of fandom and frenzy, which may become a doorway book that's opposed, as opposed to a flip book fans and kimonos symbols of Japanese MMA were popular among late 19th century artists and
poets, Mel or may wrote 18 points on fans and gave them to women he admired this one to his daughter. I put underwater.
The complaint, which is one section for my collection concern, concerns at 2015 scandal at Boston Museum of Fine Arts, as owner of Monet's law Japanese a portrait of clods wife Camille, the museum hosted kimono Wednesday's art lovers Donna replicant pose
before the painting. I right protesters appeared carrying signs exoticism racism appropriation imperialism and murder.
To meditate on Monet and cultural appropriation, I manipulated 1600s kimonos from Boston museums book collection.
I wrote about Claude Camille and Japanese, and made my own images which I also wrote about creating a reflexive Express stick form.
On this origami airplane pattern artists models chat, evaluating how they were portrayed if they got paid, etc.
Worrying my kimonos for becoming too pretty. I crumbled an image and Keynote took a screen grab and return the wrecked Komodo to the project.
Japanese characters for beautiful woman span the ropes border,
researching the history of Japan and France and Japan and the US, I found Commodore Matthew Perry's 1853 demands to open Japanese ports on the left is a partial list of gifts we gave Japan to speed capitulation.
The tree is from a Monet landscape.
The image on the right is a totally blown apart Come on Oh My favorite collection.
Working in book mode side by page with pages side by side creates an awareness of potential conversations and lines of connection between the two pages truncated text tend to shift the gaze, bringing different passages into focus, promoting multiple readings.
Comment or periods theories demands continued on the ride is a tornado of cloud from NASA and commentary about an idea of working in a series that Monet likely adopted from Japanese wood blocks.
If an artists paints a landscape, a scene of Parliament, wheat feel a locomotive moving out of the station at various times of the day and year, the image will change.
On the right, the rectangular boxes gave me a Satori. The commando abstracted is t shaped the first text is a Monet letter X are painting on plan air in Norway, he described his beard hanging from his face likes to let tights.
Below that he praises Japanese artists ability to have a presence, but the shadow and the whole by apart.
The commando on the left contains Samurai warrior portraits and a snow storm. Of course I've manipulated that
platforms and programs often encourage spatial awareness. I'm intrigued by what I call the constellation form, which like stars in the sky, can be comprehended all at once.
And so that is my,
my presentation.
If I can get out there.
Thank you, Chrissy It's beautiful, so many beautiful image I want to point out some of those kimonos into life size I can wear them.
Who would like to go next. Go, why he.
So who says I will feel sorry. Yeah.
Good morning, I am I pre recorded my talk to keep the five minute mark if that's okay,
very considerate.
Just a second here.
So platforms tools and vernacular imaginary I'll just go ahead and start it.
Can there be something like a digital folk that remains tethered to the platform platforms and tools of global networks folklore is a term that defines types of human expression that are outside domains of commercial public and religious institutions,
the disappearance of a digital folk leaves behind a distributed vernacular that is driven by rapid technological innovation made by complex powerful and mostly non human entities.
Material expression online is certainly woven with the beliefs symbols and stories offline, but the unique important computer give rise to an emergent digital imaginary or shared framework native motifs and archetypes for the networked imagination to
play it in his recent digital imaginary Roderick Coover brings together a variety of voices, mostly Iliad creators to discuss how computers are transforming ways of imagining the world, making stories about it.
Many works of the lip fiction do not follow easy path, easy paths in this construction and imagine world, a work like cry presents an interface to traumatize mind mental processes are arranged as parallel story fragments navigation metaphors cinematic
montage and interface abstractions. A large part of the digital imaginary is around this shared experience of interacting with screen.
Only only Alina playfully refers to the early web attempts to personal HTML expression as a digital folklore.
In the 1990s the web was the platform and HTML was the tool. The Alina is only innovative digital art as within that art movement in general, was made in the context of this emerging web folk culture vernacular By default, the early web was a digital
imaginary made of half finished homepages alien looking code broken links and error messages.
But as Lena Lena makes clear in her writing and curating the early web, the digital folk no longer exists because current social media interfaces professionalize the vernacular, and post systems of uniform design, an algorithmic valuation.
It is sometimes difficult to distinguish between digital expression that is vernacular, and works in digital art, because both are on the same platforms and often use the same techniques.
because perhaps because of this, Leo Flores, and others have champion greater includes 70 and what academics and curators called electronic literature.
As an example of this new popular digital writing florists presents the viral video lazy cat by tech stories.
Lazy cat and extended on one line joke evokes a uniquely digital imaginary. Who exactly are we texting to and what are they doing at the moment we are texting.
The work is a time based multimodal representation of a disembodied semiotic experience. Similarly, Alan Bigelow's, how to rob a bank uses a familiar first person perspective on mobile interfaces to narrate the story of frantic network desire a greater
inclusive, it will make creators and academic see the important synergy between ambitious digital art and popular vernacular forms, but hopefully not to the diminishment of the former, the critique of third generation, he lived as often directed at the
social media companies themselves, many of the most popular platforms Distort and exploit vernacular digital culture by squeezing all expression into the algorithmically curated conveyor belt of content.
Really Torres and huge annual salary in there in defense of the difficult. One of a to use the acceptance of this non human memorization of human languages based site for the Rico companion book technique technique and magic, which is with his critique
of the absolute instrumentality of technique as a form of therapy techniques of brutal regime companion proposes an alternative, and very old reality system that proceeds from the inevitable, rather than from absolute certainty magic is a symbolic language
that in no way attempts to fully convey, and exhaust the object. Okay significant it's significant, quote unquote, digital imaginary is where the forces of these two systems technique and technique and magic play out in network life tourists and to Sally
defending the difficult in digital art and writing against popular forms right literature should perhaps some system critical digital literacy is placing the reader in situations of loss unsettling making foundations falter turning our relationship relationships
with language into crisis. On a knocker someone's an image for a practical approach to the issues of inclusive city in the face of technique for wild garden, instead of killing off what appears at first to be pest needs.
The permaculture gardener allows a variety of organisms to flourish turning enemies into unexpected allies on the way to a richer and more resilient ecosystem companion proposes a similar metaphor for how human culture can stay in balance with the technical
regime in Renaissance, Italy, it was common for wealthy homes to have a garden for both food and philosophical contemplation, a manager Cosmos that was part of that fruit and vegetable farm part rational geometric design and a final part, quote, The Bosco
which was left in a state of wilderness daunted by statues of pagan gods, making space for wildness in a man made environment is an effective even rational method for maintaining healthy ecosystems and human countries.
In practical terms for the healthy future of electronic literature for all digital art the probes digital imaginary. And for a human culture at large, for the human culture at large.
We should demand that our platforms tools and institutions welcome the inevitable wildness at the center of human existence.
Thank you.
Wow.
I really enjoy the metaphor of the garden and thank you for being like attention back to Anna's essay, which I believe is also in conversation with something that Kathy in Barron's wrote for NPR so if people want to check that out.
You also mentioned Leo's essay which also appears in Eb ours.
Yes, I, I did cuddle, I mean Nick is also part of my paper and I didn't, I had to cut him sorry Nick, that's that's okay because I'm going to talk about Nick now for five minutes ago.
I guess I'll I guess that's a natural entryway into what I have to say, Okay, So, the paper I wrote for this panel and fought me back. Maybe because I wrote it on paper, and it pleaded with me.
Again, or again pleaded against as a becoming an ms ms document and then a PDF. And I don't think we'll ever want it to be constricted to any of those platforms so, even as it settled into a PDF format I finally listened to what it wanted and why does
it become a hypertext so this paper was born to be a hypertext I was writing a book chapter for forthcoming edited collection on space and English and wanted to trace a work of a lead from its content to its interface from its interface to its data from
from its data to its hardware from its hardware to his computational components to its raw materials to its origins on Earth. OK, so the very unseen hands the dug it out of the ground or be refined it's like a way scraps to be inserted back into the production
trick chain and it was a lot. The big chapter, but in the idea of talking about it today once again in this linear form.
Know the paper five back so now it's a hypertext the aesthetics of which I'm not entirely happy with yet but I'm happy to share the beta versions with you.
So, please see the link in the chat for from Silicon from screen to silicon, or you can follow along on my screen so first what I'll say is
we in, I wrote it in twine so right now it looks like this. And if this, if the structure looks slightly familiar, I can explain some of my inspirations and making it look this way but
what I'll do is lay the story from the beginning.
Hey, so great. This is called from screen to Silicon reverse engineering the computational infrastructure of new commodity it's round again a beta version, and if you want the work cited you can find them here for the long before the full work, think
so you can click at your own pace or follow along. And I'm going to go full screen.
Tell me where in the world two devices come from, how and by whom are they produced what happens to them when they are no longer of cultural value to us.
Why should I care. And so, I,
as I said I focused on one work and make my first round and the story starts with some questions that consumers may ask about their digital devices life cycles, a topic I spoke about it yellow 2018 and Montreal, but perhaps they won't ask in which case
they can click this and this question Why should I care. And I can explain to them what I'm doing in the works I'm inspired by including Kate Crawford's anatomy of an AI.
So, this starts.
You know what the.
I can't see the screen so I'm going to not full screen and apologies I hope people can still read this, when engaging with the digital device, whether pressing keys streaming a video or swiping through photographs.
The screen is where the attention of most users stops, a user's undivided attention on the screen interface is arguably the sole focus of many commercialized devices catalyzed by practices and black box design, which are used in many technological industries.
I think I'll let people read the rest on their own time I elaborate on that a little bit more.
And this chapter explores how users can be encouraged to think about hardware operations that occur when using digital devices as well as the material.
The labor the environmental processes of producing repurposing and disposing device hardware. So I'm seeking to rethink the ways in which we think about imagine computational infrastructure, especially just traveling the classic capital circuit model,
production, distribution consumption and re insert.
What happens before which would be excavation. And what happens afterwards, which would be repurpose saying disposal. And I'm drawing upon, as I mentioned k Crawford's anatomy of an AI system, which looks a little bit like the charts that I think the
overview that I'd shown. There's the center of process and production in the middle. The what was familiar to the, to the user. And then, I think this is being cut off. But on the left, there would be the mining processes the production processes among
all the after and then on the writing, it's the,
What happens with the device when you're done with it.
So
then I tell them a little bit about my methodology.
I'm using it similarly to Kate Crawford and also to Benjamin h Broughton I'm using this nonlinear storytelling approach, arguing that critical and creative storytelling about computational infrastructures can further understanding of these processes and
I try to. I try to pair them at the same time, with a creative nonfiction narration of my own user experience with the device. So I narrate narrate stages of my experience with the laptop.
And my case study is Nick Monfort generative computational Poland round, which just described some of the functions of its own operative software and hardware.
And in choosing rounds.
I explicitly note that it is not the objective of Morford nor of his critical creative work to address, and that he's not in a position to blame for for not addressing the exploitative aspects of techno capitalism that rounds through multiple associated
steps, ultimately points to. I choose round four it's a huge awareness of the relationship among screen content software and hardware and for its successes in ultimately drawing more attention to these relationships, compared to other works that I could
have examined.
So here's where the narration starts in a different font. I'm a reader in Toronto, Canada. I'm also a computer user sitting before a laptop that does not have that does not have any programs running.
I open my internet browser and type in the URL to access make more offers generative poem round, and which is published with the binary press.
Now I've become a client to seeking your website hosted by the online publishing house, new binary press with the IP address
found their IP address.
While the precedents editors are located in Cork, Ireland, the IP address reveals that new binary process data and web servers, hosted by eyes can be black knight hosting are located at the Carla, Carla data center and Carlos, Ireland, which is about
kilometers from cork. So please feel free to click around because I should say that laptop explains the purpose of writing this in the first place in person. First Person narration computer using jumps to the question of how my laptop was made, like my
my literal Mac Book Air laptop. And so if someone clicks computer user, for instance, they will meet other familiar questions.
You may wonder what's with someone like to choose one for me to answer, they're going to, they're going to load for a bit so.
Anyone want to choose one something you've wondered,
what are the what are the manufacturers and what and who's doing this labor what elements to the materials come from, where are the refineries that process elements and who's doing this work where the mines who are the miners,
no takers.
How about how about what elements.
Okay.
I'm your answer depends on what materials you're looking for low is the list of the raw materials commonly found in the CPU the transistor the fan the heatsink I chose these for computer components because they're the main ones that are mentioned and
alluded to in in round so for instance if I choose silicon.
As a user I learned a little bit more about what's going on with my computer with its CPU connections to it seek CPU components that are made out of silicon.
What is where what is silicone really where does it come from, what, what, what, how is it processed.
And what are the implications of silica in after it's processed.
So for instance in India, where there are 57 mining sites in the shank Arab region.
There's been, there's been a lot of pollution and environmental, there's a lot of environmental pollution that's connected to silica silica mining sites.
So.
Alternatively, just kind of going backwards and if someone did not choose the UI, I should maybe I'll let this reload but if somebody chooses to move forward with the text and reading on about my experience of Rome's, they will perhaps follow through
with the narrative.
But at any point they can click off and the point is that like similarly to Wikipedia in which I'm reading and having all these thoughts I don't always want to follow a linear path.
And I think this is why this worked in make sense as it as it, it's never made sense as linear as a linear essay.
So I can imagine the trajectory of the data as it moves from cork to Carlo to me in Toronto, and the data is represented as this ephemeral content but it's not necessarily a femoral right it's it relates it correlates to something very much material.
And when the rep website loaded successfully.
The content is the product the product of calculations that are performed by my computer processor. If I click on this, I can read more about the computer processor.
But then, to explain what's happening. I've, I've quoted Nick in in a note on round copying notes that He has for the work in which he explains that the work is calculating digits of pi and its code and running a program that calculates those digits every
time is loaded, it's loading.
And so in this case I have no choice but to learn about the computer processor, what it's doing the code that it's that the, the scripts that it's drawing from.
And then, learning about the computer process or
the text continues and around the 10 minute mark something starts to change my laptop, the words of the poem begin to appear more slowly, and I'm suddenly aware aware that my laptop's fan as it is right now, it's volume begins to rise.
Normally the fans really quiet but a 12 minutes it's really loud. And I realized that if I were listening to music, I'd have to increase the volume to in order in order to hear comfortably.
So as an experiment I run round again.
While taking a video call and then a three minutes It sounds like my computer is going to explode.
So it's unavoidably loud and, and I read Monfort explanation of what's happening as round runs the production of texts will slow down more and more as, as more and more steps are necessary to determine the next digits of pi, your computer will also slow
down on other tasks and will physically heat up your computer fan of your computer span will work harder as your processor labor's to complete these computations.
And then a little bit about fans and what they're trying to do the laptop band is going into overdrive but the safe temperature that is going for is 35 degrees.
But it's if it reaches 80 to 200 degrees Celsius, then your computer will shut down.
I think at this point I mean it could, I could keep going and going because I kind of talked about what would happen if your computer were to overheat if I were to keep running round, essentially, either.
I have to close round or my computer will close it for me because it will not, it will.
Theoretically, burn itself out, and then it must be replaced and then I examined and if it if I broke my. If I broke my laptop by reading round. What happens to my computer, and I'm thinking a little bit about the recovery process of E waste, where it
shipped in the world so if for instance if it was shipped in East Asia, what's going on in the global south with the processes of waste recycling and ways in which is extremely toxic, what does that look like in Southeast Asia,
South Asia.
And then there's a longer prop and there's a longer explanation about
harmful effects of waste rights recycling in various parts of the world. So, I think I as mentioned, you can click around because it's going to go on for a while so I'm going to stop there and let people just play with that.
Thanks very much.
So Eric or Caitlin.
I can jump in.
Thanks Eric.
All right, so I don't have any slides will just be speaking today. Thank you for being here. Thanks to yellow and for the panel organizers for making it possible and looking forward to the discussion and what's been done already has been fantastic.
So, I'd like to start with the question I'd like you to think of a work of Isla that you are fond of maybe it's something that you've seen at this conference maybe it's one of your own works, maybe it's something else entirely.
And start to consider that works content as distinct from its form, start to separate the two in your mind, and depending upon the work you're thinking of this may be easy or difficult or something in between.
It may seem impossible.
But the question that I'd like to pose is what would it take to make that content if you are able to kind of separate it in your mind publicly available in such a way that someone might want to restage it in a different form.
I'm sure many lit pieces might contain txt file there's some kind of Corpus that serves as its raw material. But when we think about the score for a piece of music or a script for play it isn't just a file containing notes or lines of dialogue.
There's metadata and context embedded in it that tells us who is doing what when and how.
And that additional context in a way turns the script of the score into a kind of platform for human software based upon which multiple applications, ie performances can be run this ability to restage content independent a form is I think a pretty vital
aspect of human creative practice that from a technical standpoint, doesn't actually work that well or happen that often when it comes to digital art and even digital entertainment content tends to live and die in the box that it came in, and yet there
are many ebooks, feel it works whose content I would enjoy experiencing both inside and outside of their original packaging, to a second question.
Should we try to make the content of digital art more like the script for a play or a musical score Should we try to make it easier to restage.
I first got interested in this line of thought after years of working on digital projects with content that seemed to want to become platforms in this sense.
First, that was the vectors journal where we published experimental multimodal essays, each one with its own custom data model that clearly separated the content and the structure of the essay from this form.
Then there's scalar scholarly publishing platform that integrates an API into every publication and API that can be used to query that application that publication structure content and media, something that many scalar users I think may actually not
be aware of.
Then as I started getting into making interactive comics and the tools to build them. I started dreaming of finding a way to assemble and publish the metadata we were always just on the cusp of having metadata about which characters were in what panels
who was speaking when where various scenes were taking place and even what notes were being played in the musical score.
But the problem is it's extra effort to come up with this contextualizing metadata when you're in the middle of creating a work, and it's effort that may not be rewarded because the practice of restage and content is not so widespread least in this technical
sense.
So about five years ago all this led me to make a personal commitment that any solo projects that I released would both allow users to bring new content into the work and enable the works content to travel and be restaged elsewhere.
And this really was the genesis of step works the platform I've been developing since then, on its surface networks as a tool for making simple he lit in the form of linear narratives with text media and musical timing.
But unlike a typical media composition tool where you're manipulating isolated instances of those things a bit of text here and image there. And step works they're positioned as actions taken by characters, not unlike what you might find in a game engine
or an IF engine text doesn't just appear on the screen it's spoken by someone or something a musical phrase isn't spontaneously sound it's played by a character on a specific instrument.
And all this context is reflected in the data file steps creates which are simple JSON.
So in a way, by default anything you make with this application is already a kind of platform it's already a file describing who is doing what when that can be restaged any number of ways and my hope is that by showing some of the value of this practice
that it might become more widespread that we might see more cases of Isla it works where the content both exists in its original form but can also travel and be restaged in many different ways over longer periods of time.
So I'll end this with another few questions to pose, one. If it was just as easy to create restage double content for your projects as not to do it, would you do it.
What concerns might you have about doing so. And what possibilities might open up.
Thank you.
Those are thought provoking questions and I love that you're dead directed them at the audience.
Caitlin Would you like to Oh sure, no that's great, thank you so much I loving this panel so much and Eric you just made me think of something entirely different and like she feels like the entire political economy narrative is part of platform and the
anyway beautiful. So, Margie likes you were urging us to think about the way that we're bound to the tools we use as well as enabled by them and to think about connections and disconnection So I was thinking that this is a theme in a lot of my work.
As I'm sure it's the same for you.
When I first started using hypertext systems, I was really struck by the way it enabled a certain kind of continuity as an expressive tool in my writing, but also incredible discontinuity at least at that time for novice leaders of hypertext and traditional
linear narratives.
So continuity just continuity divide was really urgent for me at that time and platform, really enabled me to think about a lot of new things.
One of the things that really attracted me to electronic literature in the first place was at the platforms and tools had unique expressive capacities that made me write differently.
And I felt this especially in those moments where I was really stuck with pen on paper so I share something about this when you were talking with my hands on the keyboard or in the Word document constrained by those particular platforms.
So new kinds of tools enabled, different forms of creativity and writing, and a lot of weird joys and complications over the years in those early days at least I always sort of coated and wrote fiction and poetry.
At the same time, and created the interface so it really preceded it er ative Lee, that's changed a bit over the years as I've kind of lost my comparative advantage in that.
but that was always the, the initial thing.
So, and yes echoing Christy there, changes in my writing in terms of granularity long form versus short form. More Moving Image more voiceovers and later when writing inside game engines for VR more latency and nausea, that we're only accidentally part
of the work.
Later, later moment for me and thinking through platforms were in the early days of my AR lab when we wanted to create narratives in augmented reality, but there were no tools available at that time, that would enable us to do what we wanted to do, especially
given that our lab was catering to writers and filmmakers and artists, often with little or no coding experience.
So we started to think about drag and drop tools and created our own storytelling software solution at that time called snap dragon AR.
So the process of thinking through what tool, the platform had to enable enemy really compromise thinking through narrative and platform, and thinking about the limits of our ability to make the ideal software package made really clear the ways in which
users users are constraint or supported.
From the moment of design, and that this would impact the kind of words they could write works they could write if not imagine some of the early drag and drop iterations of snap dragon AR were like one marker one movie we did a lot of moving image.
And so it it enabled largely spatial storytelling.
But I was thinking a lot.
On the occasion of this panel about how we had the capacity and how it was far more interesting in terms of narrative to imagine that each marker that a marker could come into collision with other markers and create situations see in the difficulty was
the computationally ended up we ended up crashing the systems a lot it became more complex but at the level of story that's really what we wanted. And a lot of the experiments in the lab were about creating narratives using that kind of interface, thinking
just about Eric's what was really interesting about Snapdragon is because it was really boutique II software. It was eventually sold but in the early days, it wasn't. We always bundled our story with the software, and with markers or we just said print
So small handheld things that I would do would become like large things on people's bedroom ceilings or you know how the story behave differently in people's hotel room so I am totally into that so the idea that you create.
Enabling architectures for people. And there's and the stories that you send them can be broken.
Okay, let me just think, another way I wanted to think about platforms here beyond sort of imagining and building them is what we might be able to learn from translating works between them so this has been a lot of what I do as I as I think about writing
for different platforms, but I've often literally translated the same sort of narratives across platforms.
And this is particularly when I went from having sort of like room scale immersive environments to small handheld augmented reality creations and back again.
So scale and proprioception thinking about the experience of reading and writing if you're thinking, some of these holding a story in their hands, or whether they're immersed within it.
One on one on one of the earlier narrative panels, I think, three years ago maybe it was in Portugal I remember talking about narrative and scale, so I don't want to belabor that here but scale has been really really fascinating.
and I just want to least sort of signal that it has really changed my relationship to narrative, when I think about scale and that was something that I was never trained to do and that has been largely accidental.
And that translating between large and small, taking the same small poem, something like Requiem that had been handheld and then walking through these stands as as kind of like this inhabitable architecture has really made me rewrite and and we think
So I think about platform is switching platforms and translation between platforms is as a way as a method them. And as a strategy for understanding better understand my work as a writer and the expressive capacities of different tools.
I guess one thing I'll just one other example just a concrete example of mine.
When I think about platforms is also 200 castles, which was an earlier work and some of you may have seen it because it was exhibited at a low number of years ago as a, as a paper based work and but originally it was entirely It was a, an app designed
for for iPad. It was going to have a single tracker. It was a multi story this sort of poem cystic story of like multiple stories taking place in the, in a castle.
And there was one trigger of, kind of a sundial and a 3d model the castle emerged and readers were going to find hot spots on their screen and access I think at that point there were about 25 Lexi is and what I discovered really quickly is that nobody
actually did that everybody he looked at the piece just brought up the 3d Castle and sometimes walked around, so I had to totally rethink the interface, but also the platform because I recorded it so it wasn't an iOS work.
I redid it in SAP dragon. And, and did it for print based work. And what I realized with the platform change really was concession to existing literacy is realizing that it was really, it wasn't intelligible to people and was super broken if I kept it
as as an iOS.
But also, when I changed it I realized I did have to write differently. And I had to create different kinds of of interstitial stories, because I was imagining that the form of the, the 3d model of the castle itself was kind of holding part of that story
that I could no longer count on when it became that print, print activated work.
I think I'm going a bit long, so I'm going to stop there. But I think one of the things I'm I'll end with is I often think about expressive tools that I wish existed.
And this has really changed by writing to some of the ones I always wanted that I thought would enable new narrative possibilities are sort of already here, like even in the last year so like real time collaborative immersive platforms like open brush.
And I often for this panel I was thinking a lot about 10 Nietzsche's observation that are machines are working on our thoughts and how to that's been for me.
And also that it invokes an excitement, the same kind of excitement I find in imagining narrative narrative imagining new tools and platforms, is not unlike the excitement I find in imagining narratives themselves.
Thank you.
Thanks so I'm.
I'm really happy to hear what everybody's been working on and thinking about narrative as forms of connection and disconnection.
We have 25 minutes for conversation which is not bad So does anyone have any questions for, or actually didn't Margie Do you have any questions or anything you wanted.
I just want to thank everyone those were excellent presentations and, and more importantly they brought up. I think some of the most central issues that we're dealing with today.
I have plenty. So, if you got a raise hand list it, no not, I don't think so. Oh, definitely just froze her hand, good first step.
I just wanted to say that, it, it struck me that Eric and Caitlin and like cheap, are all doing, in a way, it's something that seemed to me so important.
When Caitlin said narrative in scale, like she was kind of doing this in a more in a horizontal and a vertical dimension and Eric is removing content I think that what I would love to see as the actual environmental lead based content that stayed in place,
and took seriously this idea of critical zones. That is treated in the MIT publication for the Zkm show critical zones where exactly the point is to be able to deal with it at different scales.
At the same time, so to speak, and that is you each kind of getting at it in a different way. Let's see the life cycle or let's see that will kind of mapping what kind of environmental mapping will really speak to people and it's very hard to make people
understand scale, but absolutely has to happen if we're going to do anything environmental, so just, just comment and appreciation.
I really, I really appreciate that Stephanie because I think scale is one of the things we want to keep on the table here.
And with that, I would like to put on the table as part of our discussion.
The issue of the issue of that will brought up the vernacular of folk, and how that has been superseded by all of the tools which promise to streamline and quantify all of our online works and kind of stand in the way of anything that is quirky, or a
typical. So, because I think that, because I think that the scale of folk expression in general is at odds with the commercial scale that we're seeing so dominant today so we could like put those two together.
I have a question actually for Eric and Caitlin in the idea of a work of the lit moving into, you know, either scale or different platforms.
This is an odd question but is anyone ever dreamed inside of an email at work I mean, about an E lit work. I mean, do you dream of it in a, in a interface that is, which it comes or are you in another part of that work.
That's for everyone I
Oh, I mean I could say that I often think dream about I mean not literally dream but dream imaginatively about
a work that does change forms and exists over time outside of platforms or across platforms and has the flexibility to do that, that it can, you know, live through times, especially as we've seen such prominent deaths of platforms recently, you know,
maybe it's kind of more of a attempted self preservation of how do I make sure that the stuff I make actually you know manages to live without me having to rebuild it every 10 years.
And this idea of, is it possible to make it easier for these things to move from place to place. They don't have to be exactly the same. They don't have to be emulated, but just to have some of the structure in the shape of it, you know, live from incarnation
to incarnation and move, and I'm happy if it changes I'm happy if it if it morphs, but just allow it to do that.
That's so neat I was imagining a literal dream and I was thinking I used to dream about Tetris.
I don't know what that means about narrative or the compelling dream space of Tetris but, you know, as opposed to all of your works that Jeremy saying he's living inside of Eric's works but not so lucky here.
I also have been trumped of worlds in the dream very linearly which is the opposite of how I think, so I don't know what that means.
Good. Is it okay racism.
I was just gonna say that I think Eric's provocation is very exciting about because it kind of in a way it goes against the grain of a lot of what people have written about electronic literature where it's sort of, you know, the sort of the visual representation
and the text and the interaction, are all sort of part of the politics of the work. On the other hand, I think we're seeing as we look at as we go back and see all these efforts to revive works where the platform has, has died, or, or sort of bringing
things that are, you know, a decade or more old back generally involves this sort of repurposing of the text in the in the different elements.
So I'm just one just sort of follow up question on this is.
Do you have a kind of inkling of a framework in mind, that would enable this I know that a lot of, you know, a lot of projects with other sorts of data.
Do abstract.
The text or other elements the content from the, from the presentation, but do you have, you know, sort of an idea for some sort of platform or initiative that would make this more possible.
I think the the structure that I've been playing with personally is is quite simple. I think part of the challenges, there's so many different ways of combining these things and when we start thinking about the interactivity.
There's so much complexity, that's involved that for me I had to, I had to break it down to just linear sequences of content in which there's a set of characters and they take actions, and the space that they're in has a set of states, and that's not
a unique, you know set of constraints or way of describing, you know content but I, but to me, making it that simple also makes it shareable because there's so many different contexts in which that is applicable that particular structure of agents doing
things that it starts to make it able to travel. If, if other folks are interested in supporting it. And I think you can build a lot of the other mechanics on top of it.
You're never going to be able to build everything with it but I think it covers enough cases that it can start to be productive.
Caitlin and Christy have their hands up.
Just quickly, I think that's actually so important Eric, taking this in a slightly different direction and back to the idea of Marty's talking about like scale and commercial versus small, I often think about these small translated works, or small works
that can be sort of remixed by people and he let that I've often sent out that have been kind of like code and content and instructions as more like small artists books, which is totally changed as my lab as many of our lives have been forced into directions
where there's no longer any.
There's no rational reason to create your own software for people like me, because I have no competitive advantage so working in unity working in Unreal engines, working, you know, working with large commercial software has really blown that and I missed
those times and I do think that there's something in that about small scale, instead of.
So I think one of the, one of the things I got from your question Scott was around like scalability, how can we, you know, it's about preservation scalability, distribution, and I think another way is to go small where it where the, the metaphor would
be more like the artists book where you've got tiny boutique code, and the work, and it's. So, you know, Point taken. Nick that I think part of it is you know we be bifurcated them and that we, and I think that does other things.
And I think keeping things small, and having them traveled together and passing them more like scenes and artists work to be repurposed and Creative Commons is another approach.
I have a thought on that but I'll Christie's hand is up so I'll wait my turn.
Well, I feel so related to everyone and, and yet different, because I'm mostly reading.
Like all French texts you know about ra or something. And looking at paintings every day. And yeah, I learned so much from you I feel, you know, and I'm as an older person I'm, I'm concerned with legacy I know that might sound pompous but I have created
pieces that I thought were full of ideas that were transportable, and I'd love for those to be, and some of them are in, in the works but it's very very difficult and.
So, as, as people have been talking I just would feel like oh yes I know what I know what that means I work so hard with drag and drop one time and it was.
And now I look back and it's destroyed again.
When across platforms now it's not cross platform did flash, you know, many things like that it's very frustrating. And maybe that explains why I did nine books, during the pandemic.
Because I want I want what I'm doing, to have some longevity.
And so I really believe in multiple avenues and as many as you have the energy and time for to learn about or collaborate with is fabulous I just, I so admire everyone who's who's spoken today.
Thank you for having me.
Thank you.
I'm going to go up to the chat to a question that was asked by Jeremy height.
And he says semiotic Lee and semantically there has a shifting resonance and is more porous than the general concept as defined would love to hear how each of you are inspired by the play around the paradigm
think this is a question that margin I've been thinking about for six years.
And that's why we keep doing this panel, and so it's a very it's a very big question.
How can I answer this question. Oh, Yes. Yeah, well I don't know what the paradigm.
But I do understand the issue of of whether or not we consider narrative to be flexible fungible transportable and scalable, and all kinds of ways, and I, I believe that we tend to think of narrative as being perhaps a lot more flexible than it actually
is.
The idea for example, you know, people said to me right away when Olivia was going to be able to be played anymore. oh well you know and just print it out.
But of course, the whole point of this and like she and I have talked about it, Stephanie I've talked about it, 30 years now.
What is it about the issue of electronic literature that somehow or other, does, in fact, make it not printable make the issue of how to approach the scalability, the way that we see it, and accident.
Make somehow the narrative either work or not work. And I think that we, we have tended in our, in our hopes to see things eminently always transferable,
read, read doable mixable that to forget that narrative is actually pretty fragile.
And one of the reasons I think that we have a problem with people complaining that electronic literature isn't real literature tense, sometimes with narrative to surround the issue that the narrative is not eminently always expandable and flexible and
when certain parts of a carefully constructed hypertext are offended or broken or alluded or in any case, last that the very carefully constructed narrative arc, which still has to exist even in hypertext can be can have its rhythm and its essence disrupted
so much that the reader does not have the narrative experience, and I still think the narrative experience comes from a sense of wonder discovery.
I'm refreshed resolution, and all of the things that we would think of as as in a classic literary experience.
Scott you had a response. Um, yeah well it just more of a comment I was thinking about you know the the project that rod Coover and I did hearts and minds.
The one about prisoner torture in Iraq, and then that project we produced in unity and originally it was designed for, you know, a cave VR environment.
But the, The interesting thing about that and one of the aspects of unity is that we were able to reiterate it in a bunch of different forms. And the thing that struck me as we did this was just how much the work changed, even though those assets were
the same.
So we did it once, as you know, just for a computer for a demo, and people walked up to it and thought it was a game, you know, and they were trying to figure out how they could win, navigating this space while hearing these stories of torture.
And then, You know, we did it a number of different 360 environments, but then also work very well in a kind of cinema environment which again was different.
And we did it you know in a planetarium once and that that changed the experience a lot and a lot of it had to do simply with the literal scale.
And but but I think it had all these kind of unanticipated effects on the effect. And on the experience of of experiencing it as a social net narrative experience and that had to do with the scale and, and with the environment in which it was produced
but that was also, you know, something that was ultimately very exciting about having a project that could be reiterated so that was just more of a comment on scaling up oh,
maybe I'll just respond to as a as an afterthought to what Jeremy was saying and then Nick has his hand up for after.
So, I also am trying to figure out what the paradigm means, but I will say that as maybe one of the paradigms.
I think about what Margie is just said with regard to narrative as being flexible versus narrative, when it's made to be inflexible narrative limited by infrastructure in some ways and and this really reminds me of
an argument that love matter which made in which he said that he was surprised that narrative exists in the age of the database. This is like in the language of new media and 2001, but of course then Catherine hills argues against us and how we think
and 2012 and says like actually there's many reasons that narrative is completely pertinent, we still need storytelling and manage his argument is that there's no room for like, I guess, deviation and meaning that it's all about transitions and like one
line through and not necessarily all these different ways to tell to tell to, to make content if if it's like supposed to be almost mathematical and, and then the concerns that there are the conversation that kind of happens between them also reminds
me of when Alan lose warnings of like the parameters of codes to structure and almost predefined are writing and now I'm going back to Scott's earlier question about structures and platforms and what we can.
What kind of tools we can use, and I'm specifically thinking about my concerns with twine as a platform because if you are in the earlier series on twine, I mentioned that the interface is now such that it can, it's kind of like with the wig and you can
drag and drop code. And I think that is a kind of a parameter ization I'm trying to be positive about it as a form of access and increased literacy or at least transparency about it but I'm not sure.
It actually helps so that is how I'm thinking about narrative in terms of how it is flexible but it's also being constrained and prepackaged in all these ways.
Nick has his hand up and I'm going to keep an eye out on time because I just got a message from the admin person who's in the room and it's very diligent with their clock Thank you, Nick.
Good. I just wanted to comment on the diverse sorts of definitions and meanings of platform, and the ways that things like digital formats like you know for instance like the gift 89 A, which only le Elena, you know famously used in early internet artwork
is not a computational platform nor is it a social media platform, right but it's a format for animation that originally emerges from the context of one communications platform compu serve, and then makes its way onto the web and into the browser and
so forth.
And so there's this idea, there's a sort of loose idea.
That's what people talk about commercially what you hear what you read about in the, in the news.
And it's like Charlton Gillespie's idea of what a platform is, which is YouTube, Facebook, Twitter, you know, and so forth. And that's actually not at all what the platform studies series that in bogus Can I edit deals with, and you know, Marc Andreessen
the definition of platform that creator of Macromedia director, right, is that it's something you program. And that's the way that developer thinks about platform very often.
Now, of course, the thing about it is that these aren't neither one is right or wrong, particularly the question of how these interact, you know, is probably a pretty profound one and then there's and and Scott points out, there's also differences in
sort of context, if you, you know take really the same computer program running on the same system and you hang it up on a flat panel a gallery, or you, you know, put it with a game controller or something like this you know then you get a different type
of reception. So, you know, this is all just to say that there's there's so much just behind this one word of the conference theme which I think is coming out in this discussion here, that, you know, is, is, I'll say, you know even in the rich work that's
been done in platform studies, it's not really been addressed yet that's an area of study.
It's not platform theory, it's not platform science, you know, the way that people have tried to pick apart the elements of narrative in a certain way.
So the question of how narrative and platform go together. We need to think, we don't know what what a platform is yet. I don't think, and so that you know so we need we need to answer more of that question, at least, to really make inroads.
I think this is where Eric and Caitlin's work really resonates for me it's figuring out by doing, and creating and using and hearing what users are experiencing and then going in and changing and tinkering again.
Does anyone else have questions or comments or anything like that we have about two minutes left.
I want to thank the panel. I thought those presentation was incredible, all of them, and I like to thank the audience because I think the responses and questions were very to the point, and certainly left us with a whole bunch to cover it the next time.
Include panel.
I think Caitlyn is super, I just wanted to amplify something Christy say because it's been an hour in the back of my mind when you start to say that you're, you're writing became shorter, and I thought about that a lot especially with some of the platform
where the granularity was tiny and the works and you couldn't have long form works on a lot of these platforms. So, just totally I think it's something that all of us need to think about in terms of especially if we think about narrative.
Where does long form go on some of these platforms and I see I've always been an advocate for its return it's around the corner, I've got a research project it's all about long form, and it never goes that long, because of the kinds of tools we have So,
anyway, it's just something that it was a great provocation and I enjoyed everybody's papers so much. Thank you.
Yeah, thank you so much for everyone for coming in for all that and the interesting chat conversation that was happening in the chat at the same time.